Welcome, my name is Mike Courtney. I am Senior Researcher and head of
section at DTU Wind and Energy Systems. In today's lecture, we're going to explore why we need
to measure the wind in wind energy. After this lecture, you will be
able to list the main reasons for performing wind measurements
in wind energy and be able to describe the main parameter,
us, that are necessary to measure. So firstly, of course,
wind is wind energy's fuel. Many know the classic formula expressing
the power P from a wind turbine, and that is here P is equal to one
half the density times the area times the cube of the wind speed
multiplied by the power factor. So from this expression, we can clearly see that it's really
important to know the wind speed. More interestingly, because we
can see that the power varies so rapidly with the wind speed, it's actually necessary to measure
the wind as accurately as possible. Even small errors on measuring
the wind speed will give a large error on the measured power. The second reason for
measuring the wind is less obvious. But as well as providing the power,
the wind also makes wind turbines bend. It provides the largest loading on
the wind turbine as we had for the power. We have another classic formula
that expresses the rotor thrust, which is the load acting on
the rotor as a function of the of the same variables we saw before. Here we have the same half and
the air density Rho and the area of A, and this time V squared. And then lastly,
the thrust coefficient CT. So as for the power, we can clearly see that the loads also
depend very heavily on the wind speed. In the picture here, you can clearly
see how the thrust on the rotor, the wind is of course coming from this
direction, how that is bending the blades. And if the blade bends too much,
of course, it can even hit the tower here,
not only is it a problem for the blades. But of course this thrust acting
on the rotor that gets pushed into the turbine through the nacelle and
all the way down the tower and actually right down to the foundations. So if we don't get our wind calculations
correct, and if we don't know what the wind speed will be, then possibly
the wind turbine could even topple. There's a second less obvious
reason why the wind is an extremely important loading factor for
wind turbines, and that is turbulence. Turbulence, of course, is the small variations in wind
speed that we see all the time. And turbulence causes the loads
acting on both the blades and the tower to change all the time. This induces fatigue in the tower and
in the blades and can also ultimately cause
the turbine to fail. Before we look at some applications for
wind, let's actually have
a look at some wind data. Here is ten minutes of wind speed measured
from a couple of meter, as you see here. Straight away we can see the very
turbulent nature of the wind. You can see how the speed is going up and
down all the time. It's very usual to look at 10 minutes
of wind speed data at a time. And we will always firstly
calculate the mean speed. Here it's around 9 meters per second. And then we will calculate
the standard deviation of the speed. Here it's about 1.6. And lastly, using these two numbers,
we will actually calculate what we call the turbulence intensity,
usually referred to as TI, in this case 1.6 divided by 9, and
expressing this as a percentage, 18.5%. Just to recap,
this is a very important parameter. The turbulence intensity is the standard
deviation of the wind speed divided by the wind speed expressed as a percentage. Let's also look at some wind direction
data that's also very important. And here it's measured from a wind vane,
also 10 minutes, in fact, the same 10 minute period
that we saw in the previous slide. Here as well, you can see that
the wind direction is also turbulent, it's fluctuating all the time. And here, as well, we will usually
always calculate the mean value. Here it's around 180 degrees. And also the standard deviation
of the wind direction. The wind direction is defined
as the direction that the wind is coming from and
is measured clockwise from the north. So now we're going to look
at some applications and then see what we need to know
about the wind and when. We're going to look at
testing of new prototypes, determining the wind
resource at a new site, making sure that newly purchased turbines
produce the power that is promised. And lastly we'll ask the question do
turbines themselves actually need wind measurements? The first and most obvious thing to test is how
much power does the turbine produce? Does it actually live up to
the expectations of the manufacturer? And to do this, we of course need to measure the mean
wind speed probably at several heights. We need to measure the turbulence
intensity because the power also vary to a certain extent with the turbulence. We need to know the wind directions to
make sure we have the correct inflow conditions. And lastly,
we'll need to measure the temperature and pressure of the air in order
to know the air density. But it's also very important when
testing a prototype to make sure that the turbine will survive. Meaning do the measure loads actually
agree with the loads that have been calculated and
simulated in large aeroelastic models? Many of the parameters we
need here are the same. We will also need what we
call a profile of wind speed, that is how the wind
speed varies with height. We will need also the profile
of wind direction. That's what we call wind via. And again, the turbulence intensity is
absolutely essential to know another important application of wind measurements
is looking at proposed new wind projects. What do we need to know there? Firstly, of course, we need to
know how much energy we can expect the project to deliver,
because ultimately the energy will also tell us how much money we
can make from the project. In order to measure the energy,
of course, we need to put up a mast and put some instruments. And then we need to measure
the horizontal wind speed, and we need to measure the wind direction. And once more, of course,
we need to know the air temperature and the pressure so
that we can always know the air density. It is also important to know what is
the wind climate by wind climate, we mean how severe is the wind
loading at that particular site. So that means that we need to actually
measure this time some time series of wind speed and directions. And from those we need to calculate
the turbulence intensity. It's always very important. We need to calculate the wind shear, how rapidly the wind speed
changes with height. And then we need to look at what we call
gusts, which is how the wind speed changes in a short period of time, typically
1 second, 2 seconds, or 5 seconds. Lastly, we try and
calculate a parameter we call V50, which is the10 minute mean
wind speed that we expect from the measurements that maybe
not more than one year. But from those, we try and predict this maximum mean speed that
we expect to see once in 50 years. All these parameters will be given
to the turbine manufacturer, and we'll help the manufacturer choose
the class of turbine that is suited and dimensioned to the wind conditions
at the particular site. Now, let's imagine that our wind
project has got installed here. I show a picture of a newly installed wind
offshore wind farm on the east of England. What do we need to know here? Well, really, it's the operator of
the wind farm who's paid the money. They need to know whether they're getting
the energy that they've been promised by the turbine manufacturers. To do this, we perform a procedure
called a power curve verification. And that simply means that we measure
10 minute means of wind speed and simultaneously measure the turbine power. We do this over the operating
range of the wind turbine. It's a process that can take some months. And from that we can actually derive what
we call the power curve and the AEP, the annual energy production that's
expected from the turbines, and see if this agrees with what
the manufacturer has promised us. Now, let's look at
the interesting question. Do wind turbines themselves
actually need wind measurements? Nearly all wind turbines
monitor the wind speed and the wind direction with sensors
mounted on the back of the nacelle. Here somewhere,
that will probably be a cupanometer or maybe even a sonic anameter. Mostly this is used to know when to
start and stop the wind turbine and to keep it aligned to the wind direction. Turbine control systems actually
don't usually use these sensors because they can sense the wind speed
themselves from the rotor speed and from the power produced
by the wind turbine. And in fact, this position is a very poor
position for measuring the wind speed as you can imagine, the flow conditions
behind the rotor are extremely complex. In future turbines, we will probably
use lidars using light to measure the wind speed in front of the rotor,
where, of course, you get an extremely good measurement. And critically important, it enables us to measure the wind
just before it arrives at the rotor. This will allow the control system to
react in time to a gust that's arriving, to maybe pitch the blades, and then in
that way to alleviate the loads that will be otherwise acting
on the wind turbine. In summary, in this lecture,
you have learnt the main reasons for measuring wind in the wind industry. What we need to measure at different
stages in a wind project's life, and what wind data look like and
how we characterize them. Thank you for listening.